Automated systems are supposed to be completely objective, but they often create what Ruha
Benjamin calls the New Jim Code.
Institutions use them to bypass prejudiced human gatekeepers in hiring.
Take an AI screening algorithm deciding whose resume gets a callback.
Because the machine trains on historical data, it learns existing prejudices, like associating
white-sounding names with success, or directing higher-paying job ads to men.
It hides this discrimination behind a cloak of mathematical neutrality.
But it's dangerous to look at this bias one issue at a time.
The system's racial filter penalizes a black man, and its gender filter penalizes a white
woman.
So what happens when a black woman's resume enters the machine?
She stands precisely where two data roads cross-race and gender.
The automated harm doesn't just come from one direction, it converges from multiple
axes simultaneously.
Kimberlé Crenshaw coined a term for this compounding trap, intersectionality.
Once the algorithm is built to process single variables, either race or gender, the amplified
damage inflicted at the crossroads falls into a void, completely invisible.
Ultimately, this kind of AI screening system doesn't remove human bias from the job
hunt at all, it efficiently streamlines a digital caste system, compounding the
damage for those caught at the multiple margins.